blog\n\nI have always preferred writing in first person. I find it far more natural to adopt the voice of a character and explore the narrative through their worldview than to take on the role of omniscient narrator. But that doesn’t mean I haven’t tried the alternative, to varying degrees of success.\n\nI think the challenge I find when it comes to writing in third person is that it’s so much harder to explore what is going through a character’s head. In first person you essentially become the character and so articulating their experience is fairly straightforward but to do third person well you have to show rather than tell, and this is much harder, especially when you’re still trying to make the audience empathise.\n\nIt’s no coincidence that Windmills and Boone Shepard, the two of my stories that have persisted the longest, were both written in first person. Boone’s wry, exasperated, self deprecating approach to his adventures is fundamental to the style of his stories while one of Windmills’ biggest strengths was always the contrasting perspectives of its three central characters. First person allowed me to dig deep and I think was an inherent part of the reason those stories have always been so important to me.\n\nAnd yet the time seems to have come where I have no choice but to kill that particular darling, at least as far as Windmills is concerned. I’ve been writing a fair bit in blogs lately about the current iteration of that novel, which I’ve been slowly working on over the last year, but one thing I haven’t mentioned is that, unlike previous versions, this one is in third person.\n\nPart of the reason for this is the condensation of the narrative. Originally Windmills took place in four distinct parts over several years, each told from the perspective of a different character. The current version essentially tells the same stories in a much smaller time frame, meaning they largely occur parallel to each other, and this made writing in first person much more challenging. I briefly considered pulling a George R.R. Martin and having the story alternate between the perspectives of three viewpoint characters, but it doesn’t really suit Windmills; certain extended parts have to be told from one character’s point of view while others require more jumping between perspectives. Some of this structure is due to the fact that this particular iteration of Windmills was originally designed for television, where I could be far looser about whose eyes we saw events unfold through, but in a first person novel that has as much going on as Windmills does that becomes an impossible task and so, to tell this story the way I felt I needed to, my only choice was to bite the bullet and shift to third person.\n\nIt’s been a weird experience, to say the least. The writing hasn’t felt nearly as natural as previous versions, and yet reading back over it I think it’s significantly better than any of them. Third person has certainly given me the narrative flexibility I needed but that doesn’t change the fact that I’m so used to telling this story through the eyes of specific characters that taking a step back makes me feel oddly disconnected, like I’m not as invested as I have been in previous attempts. Of course part of this is certainly due to the fact that I’ve been working on various reworkings of Windmills for so long that it’s a legitimate surprise that I have any passion left for the story at all, but being unable to relay events in the unique voices of Leo, Lucy and Ed is weird.\n\nThat said, I think it’s largely been a benefit. I mentioned above that third person requires you to show more than you tell and so I’ve taken this as an opportunity to introduce more subtlety and ambiguity to the narrative. I can depict the actions of the characters with the barest glimpse of their thoughts and let the audience put two and two together regarding the whys of their choices. It gives a slight detachment to proceedings, but I think it makes for a more interesting novel on the whole. I’ve always had a tendency to over-explain in my writing and telling the story this way kind of forces me to do the opposite in order to make it compelling. It’s a weird, uncomfortable step into new and different territory for me, but reading over the novel so far makes me think it’s working. When you’ve written a story as many times as I’ve written Windmills it’s easy to become set in your ways but important to be willing to break said ways to break new ground and give yet another version of the same story a valid reason to exist.\n\nIf you want to progress as a writer you have to be willing to step out of your comfort zone in more than just the territory you explore. Even if it seems scary or like you have to say goodbye to something you loved, the results may just surprise you.\n\nOne of the first pieces of advice you’ll ever get when you set out to be a writer is to ‘kill your darlings’. It’s a phrase that refers to the practice of getting rid of passages, phrases, characters or subplots that you really like when they’re not serving the story properly. Generally speaking it’s a good rule; every storyteller will sooner or later find themselves in a situation where the only justification for including a certain story element is ‘but I really like it!’, which, simply put, isn’t good enough.\n\nBad stories come in many forms but the worst offenders tend to be stories that force the audience to put up with things that aren’t necessary or entertaining. It’s in these instances that ‘kill your darlings’ might have saved the narrative, as a writer who seriously interrogates the worth of every aspect of their story tends to tell a story worth hearing.\n\nWhich brings me to Windmills. For those unaware (and I can’t imagine you’re reading this if you’re unaware), Windmills has long been the love of my storytelling life, a psychological thriller I first wrote in high school that I’ve never quite been able to leave alone, whether I’m adapting it into a play, self-publishing it as a novel, adapting it into a TV screenplay or, as I currently am, reworking it as a novel again. Windmills tells the story of Leo Grey, a teenager who makes a terrible mistake that haunts him for the rest of his life as his continued failure to do the right things leads to his moral decay and causes a domino effect that destroys the lives of those he cares about. The process of revisiting Windmills again and again over the last eight (!) years has been at times frustrating but ultimately satisfying as bit by bit I’ve gotten closer to what I think the story has to be.\n\nOf course, over such a long period there have been characters and plot elements added and detracted from the first draft. Some of these have helped while others have slowed down the process, but one character has managed both. Charlotte Laurent was never present in the original draft; in fact she first came into being as the protagonist of a companion novel I tried to write immediately after the first draft. Charlotte was the girlfriend and eventual wife of Dominic Ford, the drug lord antagonist of Windmills, and the companion book would have depicted her corruption in a way that paralleled Leo’s, leading up to a showdown between the two. The more time I spent on the novel however the more I realised it wasn’t working, and Charlotte’s arc ended up predominantly as backstory for the next version of Windmills, in which Charlotte herself became a supporting character.\n\nMaybe in part due to the fact that Charlotte was meant to be a protagonist but ended up being more secondary, she’s always been a big favourite of mine. As a character she’s innately fascinating to me; younger than the rest of the cast, she basically gets dragged into a world she doesn’t fully understand which proceeds to twist and change her until she is finally forced to decide where she stands. Charlotte is one of the few Windmills characters who eventually got a happy ending because she was one of the few I really felt didn’t deserve to suffer in some way.\n\nHowever, after Windmills won the Ustinov award and I started developing it as a TV series concept in earnest, some darlings faced the chopping block and Charlotte was chief among them. The reason for this was simple; Charlotte’s role in the story took place entirely in the extensive part of Windmills that followed the central characters out of high school, and the TV version of Windmills, tweaked in the interest of making it an easier sell as a young adult story, only leaves high school at the very end, meaning there was very little room for Charlotte to appear in any way that felt natural. I tried really hard but in the end the best I could settle for was a brief cameo at the end that didn’t touch on all the backstory or relationships she had originally had with the other characters. And with the new version of the novel closely following the TV series outline, it stood to reason that Charlotte’s role would remain unfortunately minor.\n\nWeirdly, however, for a character who never existed in the earliest versions of the story, the loss of Charlotte was something of a fatal blow. Try as I might, the story just didn’t quite feel like Windmills without her. Charlotte is so central to so much of the mythology that without her it felt somewhat like I was working on a high school drama that included some of the elements of Windmills without ever getting near the soul of it. Because, as I slowly learned, Charlotte, like Leo and Lucy and Dominic, is now part of the DNA of the narrative and without her it could never quite feel complete.\n\nSo what do you do? Logic dictates you kill this darling, and yet instinct begs you not to. I struggled with this for a while but in the end I decided that I just had to persevere and try to ignore the gaping hole left by Charlotte. I couldn’t, after all, twist the entire structure of the story just to include one character whose role in the narrative wasn’t all that important.\n\nWell.\n\nThe funniest thing about writing is how often you don’t recognise the obvious. Plot points can hit you in a wave of glorious inspiration that of course this is how the story is supposed to go, how could you have been so stupid? And once that realisation hits home, it becomes clear just how flawed the story was before, how this new development actually solves several issues you didn’t even know were there.\n\nFor context, I’d planned the new version of Windmills to take place in six parts, each of which focusses on a different character (kind of like Skins with more murder and suicide and… well actually, just like Skins). The final part would come after a time jump, but the preceding five all took place in close succession, predominantly set in and around a school, starting with Leo Grey’s mistake and following the repercussions. But one issue I was finding was that the time jump, on paper, was a little too abrupt and jarring. Characters would be in one place emotionally at the end of part five and then turn up in part six having made major decisions or forged important new relationships off screen. What I needed was a way to show the passage of time, to set up the choices of the characters that would lead to the finale, to illustrate the changes so essential to the way it all wrapped up. What I needed was a fresh perspective to provide a new context to what we had already seen and what we were about to see, a new character who could raise the stakes and through whose eyes we could see the resetting of the board in time for the endgame. What I needed was Charlotte.\n\nWithin minutes of this realisation the plan changed and Windmills went from six parts to seven. And suddenly issues I had had with the new version seemed to melt away. Plot points were set up more effectively, characters could be developed more thoroughly and suddenly the novel I have been working on feels like Windmills in a way it didn’t quite before, because a character I underestimated the importance of has finally come home, taking her rightful place among the rest and, in the way all the best characters do, shining a light on the obvious in order to allow the story to take the right path forward.\n\nEureka moments like this make writing worth it for me. It often feels like there’s some magic at play, something beyond you just coming up with an idea in order to entertain people. I guess if there’s a moral to the saga of Charlotte’s triumphant homecoming it’s that killing your darlings is important, but trusting your instincts is infinitely more so. If the story seems to be pushing you in one direction, do what it says. Because nine times out of ten the story knows best.\n\nThere’s a few well known quotes that basically espouse the idea that what makes theatre special among all the storytelling mediums is impermanence. A book will last as it’s in print and people buy it, a film as long as there are copies in circulation. But theatre is different; even if a play has many productions and interpretations, each essentially represents a new artwork and once it’s finished, that’s it. Even the most long running plays will essentially offer a different experience night to night, as different actors step in or new inflections give new meaning to previously unimportant lines or moments. Despite our best efforts, theatre shows are never exactly the same twice, and that’s part of what makes them so thrilling and exciting. You are watching these actors live in front of you, and anything could go wrong at any moment. If you wanted to you could get up and run on stage and break the spell (don’t ever do that) or the lights could fail or a prop could break or someone could forget a line. Plays don’t have the luxury of being pre-recorded and every successful show is, in some ways, a minor miracle.\n\nOf course you can always film a play, but watching a recording is never the same in a medium that is designed to be live. And while some plays are turned into films or radio dramas, taking away the ‘live’ part of live theatre will always, to some degree or another, take something away.\n\nIt’s for this reason that the end of any play is bittersweet. Especially in independent theatre, where your best efforts to fill seats will never quite bring in the numbers you’d ideally like and there will always be a couple of friends or family members you wish could have seen the show who didn’t. I have always been guilty of insisting at the end of any of my shows that this needn’t be the end, that we can go on to tour or do another season in a bigger theatre or develop it into a film or something, but on a certain level this isn’t much more than me being in denial about the end of something that meant a lot to me.\n\nCertain plays of mine have had encores. Beyond Babylon appeared at a couple of one act play festivals, while The Lucas Conundrum made appearances in regional towns after its first season finished. But none of these encores were extensive, and certainly none of them eclipsed the original runs.\n\nBut after years of threatening to take shows on the One Act Play circuit one of them has managed to get there with some degree of success. Heroes finished its Melbourne run with good audiences and great reviews, but actors Matt Phillips and Blake Stringer saw potential to take it further, and so Heroes was entered in most of the Victorian Drama League festivals. While I was glad to see the life of the show extended, I didn’t pay much attention to the process. Until the show premiered at the Gemco festival and won best production. Then did the same at Mansfield. Then had a great one-off show in Benalla that led to offers for further touring engagements after that. And suddenly Heroes seems to be in the prime of its performing life, rather than in protracted death throes.\n\nIn many ways Heroes is the perfect touring show. Coming in at a tight forty five minutes after a few edits, with a sparse set and only two actors, it is singularly easy to take from theatre to theatre. And furthermore, it happens to be pretty good.\n\nWhile this might sound like a case of the writer blowing his own horn, it’s hard to argue with reviews and audiences who sit in riveted silence but for the occasional gasps and laughs at all the right moments. I can’t tell you how awesome it felt to be sitting in the Mansfield festival last weekend and to hear total strangers telling each other that ‘you have to see Heroes’ and that it is ‘the one to beat.’ And while yeah, I have always been one to let my imagination run away with me, it’s hard not to wonder about the ongoing potential of this play. Performances in Brisbane and Sydney, maybe in conjunction with Movie Maintenance live shows, seem well within the realm of possibility, and if they work out then why not go further? Why not bring it back for another Melbourne season if it continues to win awards on the One Act Play Circuit? Basically, why not take whatever chance we can to get this play in front of as many eyes as possible? Heroes still has quite a few One Act Play Festival engagements to go and after that it’s almost a definite that it will make at least a couple of other appearances, but as far as I’m concerned the longer we can keep this train going the better.\n\nA radio play has already been recorded, so I guess that Heroes has already been preserved in a way that means a version of it will always be available, but for my money the best way to experience this story will be to see the live stage version, and even if an ongoing season/tour doesn’t get huge audiences, then at least we will know that we gave as many people as possible the chance to see a play that all involved are extremely proud of and, based on the accolades and response, is very worth seeing.
Hey Factory Fans. If you haven’t seen this hilarious video from Eric Powell, creator of the Goon, you should watch it now. It’s awesome. DJ Coffman had a great response as well. You can see the video and read the response both here. If you’re a comic guy, like yours truly, they are both worth your time.\n\nI agree with 99% of what both said. It’s what I’ve been saying for years. The destruction of Print or the Direct Market or the “Era of Comics” we are leaving provides us with a unique opportunity to shape the era we are entering. That moment is here, right now and it’s rapidly slipping by. Here’s my suggestions for a plan:\n\nFor the Retailers: Understand that you are in trouble. Your entire business is going to crumble beneath you unless you change with the times right now. Monthly pamphlets will soon be a thing of the past the moment large comic book publishers realize they are no longer economically viable. This doesn’t mean you have to stop selling monthly comics in your store today, but you should be prepared for the future when monthlies are only a portion of your sales and for when no new monthlies will enter your store.\n\nRethink your business model: When monthlies stop you will need to be doing trades and act more like a bookstore or switch to collectibles shop and act more like an antique store. The first might require a store front, the second, probably not. You are either going to have to downsize or transition your sales to more trades, games, toys or whatever. An online shop and doing conventions may be your only alternative. Your customers are more likely to follow you if you are prepared to make this jump rather than finding you in the comic book store weeping the day you read Marvel and DC aren’t going to print anymore.\n\nPush Creator-Owned Comics: I’m not talking Image (although they have many fine comics) I’m talking guys who you can cut a deal with directly. When Scud: The Disposable Assassin came out, I called the guys at Fireman Press directly and ordered some for the store I worked for at the time. They went the extra mile and sent me a poster and I sold out of comics. My customers enjoyed it because it was different.\n\nWhen monthlies collapse, you don’t want all your eggs in the Marvel/DC basket. You want your store to have a rep for interesting comics and things to read, so when the monthlies die, most of your customers won’t assume you’ll be out of stock next week. Plus, small publishers are likely to fill in the gap of print to a small degree for some time. Most weren’t making much money anyway and since most stores didn’t carry their product, they’ll be happy to sell some to you.\n\nAlso, print’s customers are shrinking, webcomic readers are growing. Let that growing fan base know you’re going to stock printed collections of all the webcomics. Sure, they can order them online, direct from the creator, but you provide the extra convenience and immediacy of having the collections on hand. I know, you think this is shooting yourself in the foot, but it’s not. Shooting yourself in the foot is going down with the monthly comics ship when it sinks. Webcomic creators don’t want to spend their time boxing and shipping comics to each individual fan. They’d rather ship large boxes of 10 and 20 copies to you.\n\nWork with Creators: Have a signing in your store and promote it. Over the years, store owners have refused to have me show up to their stores for free signing. (I even bring my own signs.) They are just too lazy to do it even though it provides a free bonus to their customers. Worse were the ones that agreed then didn’t tell anyone I was coming. I mean, no one. I showed up to a comic book store in North Jersey (after a 90 minute drive) only to have the clerk look at me and go, “Oh, was that today?” The one thing your storefront can do is provide a meeting place, a nexus point for fans and creators to interact. That is a reason for customers to come to your store, to see what’s happening each week. If you don’t run events (for free!) you’re just cutting off your nose to spite your face. Even if the comic sucks, even if it’s a webcomic with no print comic available, the value is in the event. Your customers know your store is a place where comic stuff happens. That way, they won’t just sit in front of their computer all day looking at webcomics. They’ll have a reason to come to the store. If your store is dead and lifeless, fans might as well get their comics via computer.\n\nEducate Your Customers: It’s your business to know the Industry, so know it. Don’t just let your customers blow their money on overpriced crossovers you know are going to end badly. If your customers are grumbling about the comic series they are buying, give them other options.\n\nA guy I worked for would routinely hold months of comics for subscribers in the store that had long checked out of comics. I advised that we “ween” the overloaded customer off some titles, but he wouldn’t hear of it. Eventually the subscription was over a year behind, the customer refused to come into the store and we got stuck with 200 comics we couldn’t sell.\n\nI had an Avengers customer that was hardcore. He had every Avengers issue published, but complained it was no longer exciting for him. I eventually got him to try new comics. He finally stopped buying Avengers. What was the point? It wasn’t making him happy. By broadening his horizons, I kept a customer and I looked like the guy who knew what was happening in the world of comics.\n\nJust because you turn your customers onto Penny Arcade or Sluggy Freelance doesn’t mean they’re going to stop buying Spiderman. They are completely different genres and mediums. Do you stop watching sci-fi television because you discovered a great action movie? Of course not. You need to be the guru of comics. That’s half the reason your customers will come into the store.\n\nTo my Creator Friends: Webcomics are the future, so stop wallowing in your paper and ink bunkers, planning to be the last hold out, get yourself a scanner and let’s do this:\n\nGet a Website: You need one. DJ Coffman outlined the reason why, so I won’t go over them again. Learn the basics of HTML and Word Press. It’s a pain in the ass, I know. (Believe me, I know.) Get a webmaster friend to help you do the really hard stuff and keep his number handy for when your website suddenly disappears. It happens. Don’t panic.\n\nAnd if you don’t think print is dead, think on this: Wizard Magazine is gone. Its circulation was once around 400K and it regularly outsold comics in the US by a wide margin. If they can’t stay in print, why do you think you can?\n\nSuperheroes Aren’t New: If you don’t have anything new to contribute to the superhero genre, then please, don’t do a superhero comic. If you’re just recreating your childhood memories, that’s fine. Keep it to your computer and fan fiction blogs where it belongs. An alien flying around in a cape saving babies has been done. A vigilante using his millions to fight crime has also been done. Do your research and don’t reinvent the wheel or I will send Tony Destructo to your house to beat you to death with a copy of Marvel Masterworks.\n\nIt’s About the Fans: Let’s make this new era in comics about the fans. Everything you do should be to make them happy. You don’t want to follow your fans’ directions creatively (as most will dare you to destroy your own universe just to see if you’ll do it), but you do want to make comics as convenient as possible for them.\n\nYour website should be the central nexus point for information about you and your comic. Also, assume that when you post something, you are posting it for a person who just discovered your site. A “new readers” button can save you a lot of trouble if your comic has been on the web a few years. Explain everything in plain English and have an easy site to navigate. You can test this by finding someone that’s never been to your site and ask them to go to it. If they are confused, you may need to redesign it.\n\nFuck Gimmicks: You can stick those variant covers, chromium covers and hologram covers straight up your ass. Webcomics may someday create the electronic equivalent. If that happens, I will be the first in line to say, stick those collectibles up your virtual electronic ass. Gimmicks are corporate bullshit. If you want to sell me an idea, great. If you want to sell the same comic twice, go fuck yourself.\n\nMerchandise is not a gimmick, so that’s okay. In fact, you may find that merchandise is the meat of your sales. There is nothing wrong with plushies, T-shirts and whatnot. Merchandise tends to be useful items with your characters and designs.\n\nCollectibles and gimmicks are what destroyed print comic books the moment the Industry had money to actually broaden its appeal. If you do collectibles and gimmicks with your comic, I will personally send Tony Destructo to your house to force feed you a limited edition bust of Spawn’s head.\n\nBe Professional, Especially in Public: Professionals dress nice, are well-groomed, polite and informed people. They have patience and should be attentive. If you’re going to sit at a convention and ignore people and sketch, why go? Don’t badmouth your fans, your creative team or your competitors. That kind of negativity might get you noticed in the short term, but in the long term petty rivalries hurt you more than they help.\n\nJust like the retailers, you need to educate your customers. Explain to them what a webcomic is and how print comics work. Some of the fans don’t know and they may be too embarrassed to ask. Don’t whine about the Industry, fans are not fellow creators. Be positive. If you can’t be happy in what you’re doing, then why would fans be happy in purchasing your comic?\n\nDo the Comic and the Business: You want to know why so many creators got screwed on the business end of things? Most of them don’t want to do the boring business stuff they should do. Read your contracts and don’t sign them until you understand them. Make sure everything you want is in writing. Do not trust the explanation of a contract from the guy that actually wrote it. He wrote the contract for him, not you.\n\nIf you expect to live in a bubble of carefree creativity, then expect that you will be treated like pampered cattle until the guy making the money takes you to slaughter. There’s nothing wrong with work for hire if you go into it with your eyes open. Don’t give your work for hire publisher your best ideas. Remember, you’re there for the money to fuel your creator-owned projects. It’s all about the money for you in work for hire, so push for a raise, crank out the work and don’t let your employers overwork you.\n\nAbove all, don’t do a work for hire employer any favors. Unless he invests you in the project with a serious percentage of the royalties, you should stay as loyal as your paycheck and not a penny more. Remember, he’ll replace you or fire you in a heartbeat if it serves his needs. That doesn’t mean you shouldn’t act professional, just understand the business relationship.\n\nGet Your Press Shit Together: You need a press kit for your creation: a business card, a bio, an explanation of your comic and pictures of you and the comic. It’s not rocket science, it’s a fucking press kit. It will need to be updated regularly, but have a default one ready to go at a moment’s notice so you can send it out when you need it.\n\nSpend a few hours a week contacting your local media outlets to see if they will do a story about you and your comic. The “Local Man Makes Comic” story is one that media outlets run all the time. If you hate doing this, too bad, it’s part of your business. You need to get the word out about your comic. When you’re famous or flush with cash, you can scale back or have someone else do it.\n\nNewbies, Mind the Etiquette: When you decide to make the jump from fan to creator, the rules are different. Creators must answer their fans first and questions of new creators second. So if you’re asking for advice at a con, step aside when a fan walks to the table, you’re hurting my sales. Also, if I give you some free advice, buy a fucking comic book you cheapskate. It’s the least you can do.\n\nBe patient. We all have ideas and yours might be great, but it takes time to develop your ideas and put together a comic or a webcomic. Being pushy and demanding is a sure way to get you blacklisted in the Comics Community. It’s a very small community where everyone knows each other, so be polite and very respectful. Nothing annoys veteran comic creators like a new guy trying to throw his weight around.\n\nYou’ve got to prove yourself and that will take a while. One of the things that has to happen is that you have to stay a creator for at least a year. So many people jump into this business and then disappear in a year when they find it’s too much work or not what they wanted to do. And it takes a few years to really be accepted into more of the inner circles of comic book creators. Don’t barge in, we’re watching. If you survive your first year someone will finally say to you at the end of a con, “Hey, dude. We’re going to dinner. Wanna come?”\n\nLearn the ropes. One of the great ways to do that is by volunteering to help another creator. Be someone’s assistant for the day. Load and unload his car, run errands during the con and generally be helpful.\n\nHelp Your Fellow Creator: We need to create a community that helps one another, just like the rap community. In rap, if you’re famous, you help others out by rapping on a fellow rapper’s song. It’s added value for the fans, more exposure for the rappers and more money for the rappers.\n\nWebcomics already do this kind of crossover, but we need more. Print comics couldn’t do this because the big corporate entities just wouldn’t help their competition. The bigger you get, the more you need to do it. If you can pluck some poor obscure webcomic and put it to the forefront fans will thank you, the creator will certainly thank you and you’ll be owed a favor should you need some help down the road. Fame is fleeting, so be kind on your way up. You’ll need it on the way back down.\n\nHelp the Community: The Community of comics: Fans, Creators, Retailers, etc. needs to be a positive, helpful one. We have to acknowledge talented people and shut the fuck up when you see a newbie who is not. There is no reason to tear down a new guy because his comic sucks. Say something constructive, not destructive and snide. Maybe he doesn’t know that his comic is just like Ctrl+Alt+Del. Nicely tell the new creator, “Look, I think this is way too similar to another comic. Here, check it out this link.” Would it kill you to send it in a private message instead of bombarding his comment bar with “You suck! You ripped this from Ctrl+Alt+Del!” With a little tweaking, it might be good. The Walking Dead starts similarly to 28 Days and fans like both.\n\nAcknowledge Writers as Well as Artists: Print comics have been “stuck” in a mode where artists rule and writers drool for much of the last 30 years or so. This is probably a result of corporate comics and art-driven sales. However, there are plenty of comics that are well-written, but the art is only so-so. This is especially true of webcomics where the bar for art is much lower.\n\nWriters need to be elevated in the creator-owned comics community (says the writer). I can’t really do it because I am a writer. Artists need to reach across the aisle and say, “Hey, this is my writer and he’s awesome.” Writers are vital because while the art will get the fans through the door, it’s the writing that will keep them there.\n\nI’m not talking about the famous writers of Marvel and DC. Obviously Brian Bendis and Warren Ellis and a handful of others don’t have the problem of recognition in the comics community. I’m talking about people at the creator-owned level. Comics as a whole needs better writers, but we can’t attract them until we start acknowledging the ones we have.\n\nAnd yes, there are some artist/writers who are magnificent to be sure. Unfortunately, there are plenty of really good artists who suck at writing a story. You know who you are. It can’t hurt an artist/creator to hire a writer as a writer/creator would hire an artist.\n\nThis is probably a broader topic for a later article. More at some future date.\n\nTo My Friends in Comic Book Journalism: You guys present the “face” of comics and we really need to work better together. My suggestions:\n\nBe Professional: Journalists report news first, not their opinions. Your opinion is not fact. You might hate Marvel and DC Comics, but lots of people don’t. Don’t whine, rant and editorialize unless you clearly mark it as such. And if you do, please limit your rants to something you’re really passionate about.\n\nBe prepared to explain yourself and what you do. Creators need to know who you are, what you’re doing, what medium you’re doing it in and how many people you reach. If you’re doing a podcast no one listens to because you just started, just tell the creator. He’ll probably do the interview anyway. Dress nice, be groomed, don’t act like a fanboy and don’t assume the creator is going to give you free swag. Above all, don’t claim to be a journalist just to get free swag and skip into conventions for free.\n\nCover the Comics and the Creator: News stories are not just about things, they are ultimately about people. Sure, the comic you’re talking about is awesome, but you need to also find out what’s awesome about the creator.\n\nDo Your Research: If you’re going to cover comics, you have to do some research. Don’t just ask basic questions of the creator like “What’s your comic about?”. Go to the creator’s site and check it out! And when you write the article, include the research information as a wind up: “Tony DiGerolamo is a writer for Bongo Comics, the creator of Super Frat and the co-creator of The Webcomic Factory.” There, was that so hard? Two searches with Google can get you almost anything.\n\nQuite frankly, if you can’t be bothered to spend a couple of hours researching your subject, then you’re not a journalist.\n\nDon’t Just Cover Your Friends: Nepotism in comics journalism is so rampant, I hardly need to explain it. If you’re going to run a site and post nothing but stories about your good friends in comics, then please call your site “My Good Friends in Comics” not “Comic Book Website That Covers All Comics Equally”.\n\nAnd here’s a newsflash, those “friends” are not your friends. They are using you to get exposure, so wake up and start acting like a professional. You need to follow a story, not a trend. You’re getting invited to those parties after the comic book convention because those involved think you’re going to mention them on your site, not because you’re amazingly handsome.\n\nBe a Journalist or Talent: Make up your mind. If you want to cover news in comics, cover it. If you want to make comics, make them. Stop trying to do both when you really only want to do one. And, if you do both make a very careful distinction in your comics columns about who you know, who you are reviewing and when you have a conflict of interest. I do it all the time in my comics review column for KODT and I stay away from reviewing my friends’ comics. I also acknowledge who I know when I review something.\n\nI know of at least one comics “pro” who reviewed his own comic in a column once. Look, its one thing to pimp your stuff, but it’s another to use the faux credibility of a comic book “journalist” to further your career as a creator.\n\nSeek Out Creator-Owned Comics: Comic creators tend to be an introverted lot. They are locked to their drawing table, dreaming the big dreams. Your job is to find the ones that no one has found yet, so look for them. Just once I’d like to get an email that said, “Hey, I found your site and like to do a piece on you” instead of scouring and emailing dozens of sites trying to find the email of a journalist who will interview me.\n\nGet off your lazy ass and start looking for new talent. Anyone can email the top ten players in comics and ask for an interview. It’s your job to find out about new things too.\n\nTo my Friends in the Fan Community: You guys have been through a lot and you’ve been burned more times than I can count by big publishers. I have no doubt that you are sick of articles like these because they always end with blaming you for the Comics Industry’s problems to some degree. You shouldn’t be blamed at all. You’re the customer and you’re always right.\n\nThat being said, comic fans are often a passionate lot and I know many of you would like to help. Here are some suggestions:\n\nRead What You Want: It’s nice that you support indie creators and creator-owned comics, but don’t force yourself to buy something out of guilt. Keep an open mind when you see a comic that looks different, but buy it because you’ll read it, don’t buy it because you feel sorry for the creator. You’re not doing the community a favor by buying an awful comic you don’t really want.\n\nDon’t Be Embarrassed by Comics: Comic books have a bad rep in the US, but don’t let it throw you. If you can confidently say to someone, “Sure, I read comics, they’re good,” that will do way more to convince your friend to check them out than saying stuff like “Um, yeah, I like the art” or “Hey, this is also a movie!”\n\nIf you want to change your friends’ perception of comics, be an advocate, but not a crusader. For some people, the direct approach never works, but they’ll come around once they see everyone reading them. Don’t back down when someone talks about you being a comic fan, but also don’t get all up in their face about it.\n\nAnd if you’re embarrassed by your comic purchases, maybe you’re buying the wrong comics. I liked Spiderman too, but it’s over for me. I’ve moved on to more mature fare. Like my customer that kept buying Avengers, if you’re just buying to “keep your run” there’s something wrong.\n\nAcknowledge the Line: The great thing about the comics industry is that the retailers, fans and creators get to interact. If you’re a fan and you cross the line to retailer, comic book journalist or creator, understand that you’ve got to learn a new set of rules (see the things I outlined before). If you don’t, being a fan is great. As creators, we bend over backwards for you, but please understand the line between you and us.\n\nIf you stay a fan understand that as creators we are vulnerable. We put ourselves and our work out there for you to sample and enjoy. That means, tossing back our latest comic with a casual sneer and saying, “Dude, what happened? You used to be good,” isn’t appropriate. If it’s your buddy and you’re sitting in a room together, that’s different, but a fan vs. creator public spat is not cool. If you don’t like something, shut your pie hole and move along. You’re not doing anyone a favor by blathering your opinion in a public space. It’s rude and it’s not fair to the creator who put himself on public display.\n\nConversely, fawning all over a creator in such a sickening sweet way that you give everyone at the con diabetes is also inappropriate. We know you’re excited and we’re glad, but we’re not going to hang out. Creators are working at a convention and we’re trying to see as many customers as possible, so please try to understand. Be patient, as we are busy, and be polite to your fellow fans. They want to see and talk to creators as well.\n\nBe Nice to Fellow Fans: Just because another fan hates the comics you like and likes the comics you hate doesn’t mean he’s a bad person, he just has different tastes. Be respectful, polite, positive and friendly. We’re all fans, there’s no sense in putting down one another.\n\nShower, bathe and groom. Don’t roll out of bed and come to a convention reeking of rotten Cheetohs and dried Mountain Dew.\n\nWatch where you’re walking. If you stop at a con booth, move to the side so people can still get by. Be aware of your giant backpack or costume or don’t come to the con with one on. And if you have a costume and people want to take a picture, move to an area away from the action. Don’t cause a logjam in the middle of the con.\n\nDon’t finger the merchandise. Wash your hands if you do. Don’t eat over the merchandise. Get off your cellphone or go off into a corner to make your call.\n\nTalk to people. Say “Hello”. Help educate your fellow fan. Explain to new fans how things work.\n\nBe nice on message boards. Don’t be an anonymous asshole. Share your links. Praise what you like and shut your pie hole about what you don’t. No one cares about your fanboy rants. If you want someone to care, cross the line into comic book journalism and then earn enough respect that people will care. Because if you’re a comic book journalist, you should have at least done some research.\n\nIt’s About You as a Fan, Not You as an Individual: Creators are all about their fans. We work for you. But we’re not about you as an individual because we don’t know you. It’s not personal, so don’t take it as an insult. If you forget your book bag at my table at a con, I will keep an eye out for you and flag you down if I see you. I would do that for anyone that stopped at my table. If we make eye contact outside the con after it’s over, don’t ask for a ride. It’s weird. I don’t know you well enough to put you inside my car. It doesn’t mean you can’t make friends with a creator, but don’t make assumptions, we’re working. Waitresses are nice too, it doesn’t mean they want to go to the movies with you.\n\nSpread the Word: One of the great things you can do as a fan is spread the word about comics, webcoimcs, stores and websites you like. Post a link in a message board or on sites like Reddit, StumbleUpon, Facebook, Yelp, Twitter or whatever. Your personal recommendation can help creators get hits and retailers get sales. If you discuss a comic, try to be positive about it and don’t get caught up in another’s negativity.\n\nStop Buying Comics You Don’t Like: If you are a self-hating fanboy that complains about every comic that comes out, here’s a thought, “Why are you reading comics?” Get lost. Got buy something you like or shut up you miserable fuck.\n\nStop Complaining, Vote with Your Wallet: Is Superman not living up to your expectations? Stop buying it. Do you hate the newest Spiderman artist? Stop buying it. Do you really wish the original Robin would return to Batman and can’t stand the new one? Stop buying it. Don’t like your comics store and they way they do business? Stop shopping there. Did you find that a website covering comics covers nothing but fluff? Unbookmark it.\n\nIf you are only buying a comic hoping that it will get better or going to a comic book store that has bad service, that’s like going to a restaurant with terrible service and food hoping it will get better. Why would it? You still keep buying. When sales go down, companies make changes. They have to.\n\nJust because you’re part of the fan community doesn’t mean you’re obligated to buy anything. We won’t kick you out of the club. Not buying the comic that’s pissing you off gives you more money to try something new. Not going to a comic book store with a terrible record means you may find one that’s better.\n\nStart a Fan Club: If you want to be part of the comics scene, but still maintain your fan status start a fan club. Retailers like them because it’s another reason to have customers in the store. Creators like them because you will almost never get a negative reaction when you make an appearance at a fan club. As a fan, you get extra attention and as a retailer or creator, we have a concentrated place to push our wares. Win-win-win.\n\nTo my Friends that organize Comic Book Conventions: The next future years are going to be tough. We are transitioning into something new and you will need to change your business model as well. My suggestions:\n\nPromote: I’ve gone to a surprising number of conventions where the organizers did little or no promotion. I realize organizing the con is a tremendous headache, but if no one shows it’s an even bigger headache financially. Social networking, websites, message boards and using fan clubs are just some of the ways. The more grassroots your con is, the more volunteers you can get.\n\nMedia outlets are important so contact them. TV people love the costumes because they are a good visual. They love celebrity guests even more. Once you get them in, prepare a list of your most “camera ready” guests, including guys like yours truly. (I used to host a TV show and I do improv comedy, so I talk clearly, look presentable and I’m funny on camera.) That requires that you know about your guests ahead of time. You don’t want to volunteer some troll-like creator who will mumble through the interview.\n\nPromotion requires prep work ahead of time. It doesn’t hurt to flyer the surrounding area where you con will be held a few weeks ahead of time. Get the comic book stores involved. If you have a staff, have someone in charge of just promotion.\n\nCreate Visuals: Get someone to take pictures and video of your con if you plan to have it again. You need these positive visuals on your site for next year.\n\nKeep the Door Cheap: The more people, the better. If you’re going to ding fans $50 a pop, there’d better be some cool events or a few free comics. Something! If you drain the fans of money, they won’t have anything by the time they reach the rest of us back in Artists’ Alley.\n\nPublishers are usually overloaded with back stock, especially these days, take advantage of that. Ask them for a box and give it away to fans. You won’t get them if you don’t ask.\n\nHave Panels About Things That Fans Want: I can promote in any panel. I don’t need a “Publisher Promotional Panel” and if you call it that, no one will come. They, will, however, come to “How to Do Webcomics” or “How to Make Money in Comics”. Fans are not interested in sitting through a one-hour commercial unless there is a prize at the end or movie clips.\n\nDon’t have too many panels. Make the panels proportionate to the number of fans that will show up. Remember, they have to go to the convention too. And it is pointless to schedule panels late on the last day.\n\nBig Guests Should be in the Back: Your big guests should always be the longest walk. No one is going to come all the way to a con and not see your biggest guests, so make them at least walk past your little ones.\n\nI went to one con where the organizers placed three big guests right off the escalator. It was a disaster. The room jammed up and no one came to the rest of the convention.\n\nConventions Can’t Be All About Money: Look, I know you have to make the door, but if there’s no fun and you shake every fan until all the money falls out of his pockets, they won’t come back. You have to book fun events. The bigger the convention, the more fun free stuff you need.\n\nFan clubs can provide free stuff: people in costumes to take pictures with, props for fans to play with and interesting, fan-based panels. Games are always good because they just need space and it gives fans something to do. Contests are a must, whether they be for costumes or art or even doing a 24 hour comic.\n\nWebcomics are the Future: The creator for Questionable Content was at the Emerald City Con in 2010. His line wrapped around his booth and went out the door. And, while other creators, even big name Marvel and DC guys had large lines that eventually died down, his was busy all day, every day. I guess that’s what happen when a quarter of million or so people visit your site every day.\n\nNow is the time to be nice to webcomic creators. Now, while they still need you. The guys from Penny Arcade don’t need to come to your con. They have their own con and it’s quite huge and I wouldn’t blame them if they never set foot in a comic book convention again.\n\nWe are creators and we remember the people who helped us and we especially remember the organizers who didn’t. In five years, the entire playing field of comics is likely to change. Get a foothold in the future now before some entrepreneur buries you with a webcomic convention of his own.\n\nFinally, we all need to work together. Creators, journalists, fans, retailers and con organizers. Assume the positive and not the negative, because we are all comic fans. (Like maybe assume that I am a well intentioned guy by posting this, even though you may disagree with my suggestions.) We can either be a community, like the rap community, and say to ourselves, “There is room enough for everyone in this boat. Join us on the journey.” Or, we can be like a mini-Wall Street, consumed by competition and petty rivalries, spending precious time tearing each other down.\n\nEither way, it will be a struggle. I say, let’s be positive. Who out there would like to be our friend in this journey?
It is a truism that modern cell phones feature a multitude of features that expand on the traditional cell phone functionality. For example, today cell phone users are able to use their phones to connect to the Internet, manage meetings, appointments, and other aspects of their every day lives, listen to music and watch videos, etc. In essence the cell phone—which began as a single-function communicator—has grown into a fully functioning multimedia device. However the fundamental function of a cell phone remains communication. It should be noted that cell phones are also sometimes referred to as mobile phones, which in the proper meaning of the word indicates that the user of that phone is mobile, and is supposedly always available for anyone who might want to contact him or her.\nThe core functionality of mobile/cell phones has been basically the same since the first devices were made available to consumers. Although there has been a rapid expansion in the feature set of most cell phones, the core functionality has not seen a similar expansion. The reasons for the development discrepancy likely have to do with the fact that the core functionality is sufficient for most users and that there are not just that many ways of enhancing the person-to-person communication experience on a mobile device\nArguably, the most important enhancement in the cell phone, at least as it relates to interpersonal communication, has been the development of the capability of sending short text messages from one phone to another.\nOtherwise, the main improvements in communications have been largely concerned with connectivity. For example, communications protocols such as infrared and Bluetooth have become de facto requirements for all but the most inexpensive phones. In addition advances have been made in connectivity to the Internet (for example) and now it is routine for users to be able to access their e-mail and browse the web via their phones.\nHowever, these improvements in connectivity, as welcome as they might be, do not expand on the one-to-one personal communication aspect of the phone. One thing that would be a leap forward in such communications would be the ability to quickly and easily assemble a multi-user communication session that is hardware independent and, further, does not require the user to purchase additional hardware. Although the prior art has provided multi-user communications in the form of, for example, conference calls—the present technology of conference calls is quite limiting to the user. For example, it is typically limited to a predetermined number of user connections (e.g., 5). Further, a start time must be communicated to each user so there is little opportunity for spontaneity. Further, adding more users to the session may be very difficult or impossible. Finally, the conference call will ultimately be limited to known users, i.e., those who are known to one of the participants and have been invited.\nAdditionally, exchanging short messages between users is a time-delayed communication mode that typically involves a one-to-one communication. Even though some software providers have offered solutions that allow a user to send one short message to multiple participants, such is not the same as real time voice communication between these same users. Of course, such group messaging is a time-delayed communication mode too, in which at least one participant is always in a waiting position. Thus, this communication option also offers little in the way of spontaneity or flexibility to the user.\nAs was mentioned previously, over the last few years several attempts have been made to enhance the communication options available to owners of mobile devices, for example infrared and Bluetooth have been added but they have been used so far mostly for communication with other devices, i.e. for data transfer—not for direct communication between users.\nThose of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that infrared is limited to communications over a relative short line-of-sight distance between potential communication partners. As a consequence, the infrared protocol has typically been implemented as a simple data exchange protocol which is useful, for example, in synchronizing data between a mobile phone and a personal computer.\nOn the other hand, the Bluetooth protocol provides for the creation of networks, so called piconets, in which up to 255 participants can be combined, of which only 8 participants can be active simultaneously, these 8 participants consist of one so called “master” device and seven so-called “slave” or secondary devices. The master device controls the communication and assigns so-called “sendslots” to participants. Additionally, communications within a piconet are based on the client server principle, which imposes the restriction that the master (server) is needed for on-going communications. Thus, when a master device looses the connection the piconet ceases to exist until a new master is selected and re-establishes the piconet by starting the creation process at the beginning. Although a Bluetooth device can be registered in multiple piconets, it can only be registered as master in one piconet.\nAdditionally, those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that the term scatternet is often used to refer to a combination of up to 10 piconets in which each piconet is associated with a different identification frequency. However, the technical specifications of the Bluetooth communication protocol limit the functionality of that communication option. For example, those of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that a piconet can accommodate a maximum of 8 active participants. Further, a piconet will collapse if the server (master) looses the connection.\nOthers have sought, with varying degrees of success, to deliver enhanced communication functionality despite the limitations of the Bluetooth protocol. For example, U.S. Pat. No. 6,674,995 teaches the creation of a virtual ball game that utilizes data that is passed between participants via Bluetooth, thereby delivering to them the illusion that they are playing a ball game. As another example, U.S. patent application No. 20020151320 describes a method of giving users in a user community additional functionality when using a software package in a community environment. That is, certain functions are provided to the users depending on the number of participants, with higher user numbers being associated with the unlocking of additional program functionality. However, these sorts of approaches are still fundamentally limited by the nature of the Bluetooth protocol.\nAs an example of an alternative approach to the use of Bluetooth, consider U.S. patent application 2005/0063409 that teaches a method for allowing users to communicate across several scatternets. However, this invention utilizes multiple interconnected servers and is not suitable for users that wish to quickly arrange and participate in an ad hoc communications group.\nNone of the prior art communication options, however, deliver a flexible way of communicating with an arbitrary number of individual users. In each case either the users are restricted by the technical limitations of the Bluetooth standard or the communication options necessary to create a group chat are too involved for the average user to accomplish. Note that for purposes of the instant disclosure, the term enhancement of the communication options will be taken to refer to any approach that allows a user to communicate with a mobile device in addition to the already existing communication options.\nThus what is needed is a method that gives the user of a cell phone or users of mobile devices the ability to create multi-user communications on that device without a need for elaborate equipment configurations, planning, or installation and which is not bound by the technical limitations of a specific communication protocol. Preferably the method will extend an invitation to others to join a communications group and will automatically provide the appropriate software for use by new users who do not already have it. Preferably the method will use a commonly available wireless protocol such as Bluetooth or Wi-Fi.\nAccordingly it should now be recognized, as was recognized by the present inventors, that there exists, and has existed for some time, a very real need for a system and method that would address and solve the above-described problems.\nBefore proceeding to a description of the present invention, however, it should be noted and remembered that the description of the invention which follows, together with the accompanying drawings, should not be construed as limiting the invention to the examples (or preferred embodiments) shown and described. This is so because those skilled in the art to which the invention pertains will be able to devise other forms of the invention within the ambit of the appended claims.